concurrency.md, before:

# Concurrency

**[You can find all the code for this chapter here](https://github.com/quii/learn-go-with-tests/tree/master/concurrency)**

Here's the setup: a colleague has written a function, `CheckWebsites`, that
checks the status of a list of URLs.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)

    for _, url := range urls {
        results[url] = wc(url)
    }

    return results
}
```

It returns a map of each URL checked to a boolean value - `true` for a good
response, `false` for a bad response.

You also have to pass in a `WebsiteChecker` which takes a single URL and returns
a boolean. This is used by the function to check all the websites.

Using [dependency injection][DI] has allowed them to test the function without
making real HTTP calls, making it reliable and fast.

Here's the test they've written:

```go
package concurrency

import (
    "reflect"
    "testing"
)

func mockWebsiteChecker(url string) bool {
    if url == "waat://furhurterwe.geds" {
        return false
    }
    return true
}

func TestCheckWebsites(t *testing.T) {
    websites := []string{
        "http://google.com",
        "http://blog.gypsydave5.com",
        "waat://furhurterwe.geds",
    }

    want := map[string]bool{
        "http://google.com":          true,
        "http://blog.gypsydave5.com": true,
        "waat://furhurterwe.geds":    false,
    }

    got := CheckWebsites(mockWebsiteChecker, websites)

    if !reflect.DeepEqual(want, got) {
        t.Fatalf("Wanted %v, got %v", want, got)
    }
}
```

The function is in production and being used to check hundreds of websites. But
your colleague has started to get complaints that it's slow, so they've asked
you to help speed it up.

## Write a test

Let's use a benchmark to test the speed of `CheckWebsites` so that we can see the
effect of our changes.

```go
package concurrency

import (
    "testing"
    "time"
)

func slowStubWebsiteChecker(_ string) bool {
    time.Sleep(20 * time.Millisecond)
    return true
}

func BenchmarkCheckWebsites(b *testing.B) {
    urls := make([]string, 100)
    for i := 0; i < len(urls); i++ {
        urls[i] = "a url"
    }

    for i := 0; i < b.N; i++ {
        CheckWebsites(slowStubWebsiteChecker, urls)
    }
}
```

The benchmark tests `CheckWebsites` using a slice of one hundred urls and uses
a new fake implementation of `WebsiteChecker`. `slowStubWebsiteChecker` is
deliberately slow. It uses `time.Sleep` to wait exactly twenty milliseconds and
then it returns true.

When we run the benchmark using `go test -bench=.`:

```sh
pkg: github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v0
BenchmarkCheckWebsites-4               1        2249228637 ns/op
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v0        2.268s
```

`CheckWebsites` has been benchmarked at 2249228637 nanoseconds - about two and
a quarter seconds.

Let's try and make this faster.

### Write enough code to make it pass

Now we can finally talk about concurrency which, for the purposes of the
following, means 'having more than one thing in progress'. This is something
that we do naturally everyday.

For instance, this morning I made a cup of tea. I put the kettle on and then,
while I was waiting for it to boil, I got the milk out of the fridge, got the
tea out of the cupboard, found my favourite mug, put the teabag into the cup and
then, when the kettle had boiled, I put the water in the cup.

What I _didn't_ do was put the kettle on and then stand there blankly staring at
the kettle until it boiled, then do everything else once the kettle had boiled.

If you can understand why it's faster to make tea the first way, then you can
understand how we will make `CheckWebsites` faster. Instead of waiting for
a website to respond before sending a request to the next website, we will tell
our computer to make the next request while it is waiting.

Normally in Go when we call a function `doSomething()` we wait for it to return
(even if it has no value to return, we still wait for it to finish). We say that
this operation is *blocking* - it makes us wait for it to finish. An operation
that does not block in Go will run in a separate *process* called a *goroutine*.
Think of a process as reading down the page of Go code from top to bottom, going
'inside' each function when it gets called to read what it does. When a separate
process starts it's like another reader begins reading inside the function,
leaving the original reader to carry on going down the page.

To tell Go to start a new goroutine we turn a function call into a `go`
statement by putting the keyword `go` in front of it: `go doSomething()`.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)

    for _, url := range urls {
        go func() {
            results[url] = wc(url)
        }()
    }

    return results
}
```

Because the only way to start a goroutine is to put `go` in front of a function
call, we often use *anonymous functions* when we want to start a goroutine. An
anonymous function literal looks just the same as a normal function declaration,
but without a name (unsurprisingly). You can see one above in the body of the
`for` loop.

Anonymous functions have a number of features which make them useful, two of
which we're using above. Firstly, they can be executed at the same time that
the're declared - this is what the `()` at the end of the anonymous function is
doing. Secondly they maintain access to the lexical scope they are defined in -
all the variables that are available at the point when you declare the anonymous
function are also available in the body of the function.

The body of the anonymous function above is just the same as the loop body was
before. The only difference is that each iteration of the loop will start a new
goroutine, concurrent with the current process (the `WebsiteChecker` function)
each of which will add its result to the results map.

But when we run `go test`:

```sh
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (0.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:31: Wanted map[http://google.com:true http://blog.gypsydave5.com:true waat://furhurterwe.geds:false], got map[]
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        0.010s

```

### A quick aside into a parallel(ism) universe...

You might not get this result. You might get a panic message that
we're going to talk about in a bit. Don't worry if you got that, just keep
running the test until you _do_ get the result above. Or pretend that you did.
Up to you. Welcome to concurrency: when it's not handled correctly it's hard to
predict what's going to happen. Don't worry - that's why we're writing tests, to
help us know when we're handling concurrency predictably.

### ... and we're back.

We are caught by the original tests `WebsiteChecker` is now returning an
empty map. What went wrong?

None of the goroutines that our `for` loop started had enough time to add
their result to the `results` map; the `WebsiteChecker` function is too fast for
them, and it returns the still empty map.

To fix this we can just wait while all the goroutines do their work, and then
return. Two seconds ought to do it, right?

```go
package concurrency

import "time"

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)

    for _, url := range urls {
        go func() {
            results[url] = wc(url)
        }()
    }

    time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

    return results
}
```

Now when we run the tests you get (or or don't get - see above):

```sh
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (0.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:31: Wanted map[http://google.com:true http://blog.gypsydave5.com:true waat://furhurterwe.geds:false], got map[waat://furhurterwe.geds:false]
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        0.010s
```

This isn't great - why only one result? We might try and fix this by increasing
the time we wait - try it if you like. It won't work. The problem here is that
the variable `url` is reused for each iteration of the `for` loop - it takes
a new value from `urls` each time. But each of our goroutines have a reference
to the `url` variable - they don't have their own independent copy. So they're
_all_ writing the value that `url` has at the end of the iteration - the last
url. Which is why the one result we have is the last url.

To fix this:

```go
package concurrency

import (
    "time"
)

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)

    for _, url := range urls {
        go func(u string) {
            results[u] = wc(u)
        }(url)
    }

    time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

    return results
}
```

By giving each anonymous function a parameter for the url - `u` - and then
calling the anonymous function with the `url` as the argument, we make sure that
the value of `u` is fixed as the value of `url` for the iteration of the loop
that we're launching the goroutine in. `u` is a copy of the value of `url`, and
so can't be changed.

Now if you're lucky you'll get:

```sh
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        2.012s
```

But if you're unlucky (this is more likely if you run them with `go test -bench=.`)

```sh
fatal error: concurrent map writes

goroutine 8 [running]:
runtime.throw(0x12c5895, 0x15)
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/panic.go:605 +0x95 fp=0xc420037700 sp=0xc4200376e0 pc=0x102d395
runtime.mapassign_faststr(0x1271d80, 0xc42007acf0, 0x12c6634, 0x17, 0x0)
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:783 +0x4f5 fp=0xc420037780 sp=0xc420037700 pc=0x100eb65
github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1(0xc42007acf0, 0x12d3938, 0x12c6634, 0x17)
        /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x71 fp=0xc4200377c0 sp=0xc420037780 pc=0x12308f1
runtime.goexit()
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/asm_amd64.s:2337 +0x1 fp=0xc4200377c8 sp=0xc4200377c0 pc=0x105cf01
created by github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker
        /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xa1

        ... many more scary lines of text ...
```

This is long and scary, but all we need to do is take a breath and read the
stacktrace: `fatal error: concurrent map writes`. Sometimes, when we run our
tests, two of the goroutines write to the results map at exactly the same time.
Maps in Go don't like it when more than one thing tries to write to them at
once, and so `fatal error`.

This is a _race condition_, a bug that occurs when the output of our software is
dependent on the timing and sequence of events that we have no control over.
Because we cannot control exactly when each goroutine writes to the results map,
we are vulnerable to two goroutines writing to it at the same time.

Go can help us to spot race conditions with its built in [_race detector_][godoc_race_detector].
To enable this feature, run the tests with the `race` flag: `go test -race`.

You should get some output that looks like this:

```sh
==================
WARNING: DATA RACE
Write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 8:
  runtime.mapassign_faststr()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:774 +0x0
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x82

Previous write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 7:
  runtime.mapassign_faststr()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:774 +0x0
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x82

Goroutine 8 (running) created at:
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xc4
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.TestWebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker_test.go:27 +0xad
  testing.tRunner()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/testing/testing.go:746 +0x16c

Goroutine 7 (finished) created at:
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xc4
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.TestWebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker_test.go:27 +0xad
  testing.tRunner()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/testing/testing.go:746 +0x16c
==================
```

The details are, again, hard to read - but `WARNING: DATA RACE` is pretty
unambiguous. Reading into the body of the error we can see two different
goroutines performing writes on a map:

`Write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 8:`

is writing to the same block of memory as

`Previous write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 7:`

On top of that we can see the line of code where the write is happening:

`/Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12`

and the line of code where goroutines 7 an 8 are started:

`/Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11`

Everything you need to know is printed to your terminal - all you have to do is
be patient enough to read it.

### Channels

We can solve this data race by coordinating our goroutines using _channels_.
Channels are a Go data structure that can both receive and send values. These
operations, along with their details, allow communication between different
processes.

In this case we want to think about the communication between the parent process
and each of the goroutines that it makes to do the work of running the
`WebsiteChecker` function with the url.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool
type result struct {
    string
    bool
}

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)
    resultChannel := make(chan result)

    for _, url := range urls {
        go func(u string) {
            resultChannel <- result{u, wc(u)}
        }(url)
    }

    for i := 0; i < len(urls); i++ {
        result := <-resultChannel
        results[result.string] = result.bool
    }

    return results
}
```

Alongside the `results` map we now have a `resultChannel`, which we `make` in
the same way. `chan result` is the type of the channel - a channel of `result`.
The new type, `result` has been made to associate the return value of the
`WebsiteChecker` with the url being checked - it's a struct of `string` and
`bool`. As we don't need either value to be named, each of them is anonymous
within the struct; this can be useful in when it's hard to know what to name
a value.

Now when we iterate over the urls, instead of writing to the `map` directly
we're sending a `result` struct for each call to `wc` to the `resultChannel`
with a _send statement_. This uses the `<-` operator, taking a channel on the
left and a value on the right:

```go
// Send statement
resultChannel <- result{u, wc(u)}
```

The next `for` loop iterates once for each of the urls. Inside we're using
a _receive expression_, which assigns a value received from a channel to
a variable. This also uses the `<-` operator, but with the two operands now
reversed: the channel is now on the right and the variable that
we're assigning to is on the left:

```go
// Receive expression
result := <-resultChannel
```

We then use the `result` received to update the map.

By sending the results into a channel, we can control the timing of each write
into the results map, ensuring that it happens one at a time. Although each of
the calls of `wc`, and each send to the result channel, is happening in parallel
inside its own process, each of the results is being dealt with one at a time as
we take values out of the result channel with the receive expression.

We have paralellized the part of the code that we wanted to make faster, while
making sure that the part that cannot happen in parallel still happens linearly.
And we have communicated across the multiple processes involved by using
channels.

When we run the benchmark:

```sh
pkg: github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v2
BenchmarkCheckWebsites-8             100          23406615 ns/op
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v2        2.377s
```
23406615 nanoseconds - 0.023 seconds, about one hundred times as fast as
original function. A great success.

## Wrapping up

This exercise has been a little lighter on the TDD than usual. In a way we've
been taking part in one long refactoring of the `CheckWebsites` function; the
inputs and outputs never changed, it just got faster. But the tests we had in
place, as well as the benchmark we wrote, allowed us to refactor `CheckWebsites`
in a way that maintained confidence that the software was still working, while
demonstrating that it had actually become faster.

In making it faster we learned about

- *goroutines*, the basic unit of concurrency in Go, which let us check more
  than one website at the same time.
- *anonymous functions*, which we used to start each of the concurrent processes
  that check websites.
- *channels*, to help organize and control the communication between the
  different processes, allowing us to avoid a *race condition* bug.
- *the race detector* which helped us debug problems with concurrent code

### Make it fast

One formulation of an agile way of building software, often misattributed to Kent
Beck, is:

> [Make it work, make it right, make it fast][wrf]

Where 'work' is making the tests pass, 'right' is refactoring the code, and
'fast' is optimizing the code to make it, for example, run quickly. We can only
'make it fast' once we've made it work and made it right. We were lucky that the
code we were given was already demonstrated to be working, and didn't need to be
refactored. We should never try to 'make it fast' before the other two steps
have been performed because

> [Premature optimization is the root of all evil][popt]
> -- Donald Knuth

[DI]: ../dependency-injection.md#
[wrf]: http://wiki.c2.com/?MakeItWorkMakeItRightMakeItFast
[godoc_race_detector]: https://blog.golang.org/race-detector
[popt]: http://wiki.c2.com/?PrematureOptimization

Commit message:

fixes #122 - adds note about running benchmarks in powershell, thanks @lx4r

concurrency.md, after:

# Concurrency

**[You can find all the code for this chapter here](https://github.com/quii/learn-go-with-tests/tree/master/concurrency)**

Here's the setup: a colleague has written a function, `CheckWebsites`, that
checks the status of a list of URLs.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)

    for _, url := range urls {
        results[url] = wc(url)
    }

    return results
}
```

It returns a map of each URL checked to a boolean value - `true` for a good
response, `false` for a bad response.

You also have to pass in a `WebsiteChecker` which takes a single URL and returns
a boolean. This is used by the function to check all the websites.

Using [dependency injection][DI] has allowed them to test the function without
making real HTTP calls, making it reliable and fast.

Here's the test they've written:

```go
package concurrency

import (
    "reflect"
    "testing"
)

func mockWebsiteChecker(url string) bool {
    if url == "waat://furhurterwe.geds" {
        return false
    }
    return true
}

func TestCheckWebsites(t *testing.T) {
    websites := []string{
        "http://google.com",
        "http://blog.gypsydave5.com",
        "waat://furhurterwe.geds",
    }

    want := map[string]bool{
        "http://google.com":          true,
        "http://blog.gypsydave5.com": true,
        "waat://furhurterwe.geds":    false,
    }

    got := CheckWebsites(mockWebsiteChecker, websites)

    if !reflect.DeepEqual(want, got) {
        t.Fatalf("Wanted %v, got %v", want, got)
    }
}
```

The function is in production and being used to check hundreds of websites. But
your colleague has started to get complaints that it's slow, so they've asked
you to help speed it up.

## Write a test

Let's use a benchmark to test the speed of `CheckWebsites` so that we can see the
effect of our changes.

```go
package concurrency

import (
    "testing"
    "time"
)

func slowStubWebsiteChecker(_ string) bool {
    time.Sleep(20 * time.Millisecond)
    return true
}

func BenchmarkCheckWebsites(b *testing.B) {
    urls := make([]string, 100)
    for i := 0; i < len(urls); i++ {
        urls[i] = "a url"
    }

    for i := 0; i < b.N; i++ {
        CheckWebsites(slowStubWebsiteChecker, urls)
    }
}
```

The benchmark tests `CheckWebsites` using a slice of one hundred urls and uses
a new fake implementation of `WebsiteChecker`. `slowStubWebsiteChecker` is
deliberately slow. It uses `time.Sleep` to wait exactly twenty milliseconds and
then it returns true.

When we run the benchmark using `go test -bench=.` (or if you're in Windows Powershell `go test -bench="."`):

```sh
pkg: github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v0
BenchmarkCheckWebsites-4               1        2249228637 ns/op
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v0        2.268s
```

`CheckWebsites` has been benchmarked at 2249228637 nanoseconds - about two and
a quarter seconds.

Let's try and make this faster.

### Write enough code to make it pass

Now we can finally talk about concurrency which, for the purposes of the
following, means 'having more than one thing in progress'. This is something
that we do naturally everyday.

For instance, this morning I made a cup of tea. I put the kettle on and then,
while I was waiting for it to boil, I got the milk out of the fridge, got the
tea out of the cupboard, found my favourite mug, put the teabag into the cup and
then, when the kettle had boiled, I put the water in the cup.

What I _didn't_ do was put the kettle on and then stand there blankly staring at
the kettle until it boiled, then do everything else once the kettle had boiled.

If you can understand why it's faster to make tea the first way, then you can
understand how we will make `CheckWebsites` faster. Instead of waiting for
a website to respond before sending a request to the next website, we will tell
our computer to make the next request while it is waiting.

Normally in Go when we call a function `doSomething()` we wait for it to return
(even if it has no value to return, we still wait for it to finish). We say that
this operation is *blocking* - it makes us wait for it to finish. An operation
that does not block in Go will run in a separate *process* called a *goroutine*.
Think of a process as reading down the page of Go code from top to bottom, going
'inside' each function when it gets called to read what it does. When a separate
process starts it's like another reader begins reading inside the function,
leaving the original reader to carry on going down the page.

To tell Go to start a new goroutine we turn a function call into a `go`
statement by putting the keyword `go` in front of it: `go doSomething()`.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)

    for _, url := range urls {
        go func() {
            results[url] = wc(url)
        }()
    }

    return results
}
```

Because the only way to start a goroutine is to put `go` in front of a function
call, we often use *anonymous functions* when we want to start a goroutine. An
anonymous function literal looks just the same as a normal function declaration,
but without a name (unsurprisingly). You can see one above in the body of the
`for` loop.

Anonymous functions have a number of features which make them useful, two of
which we're using above. Firstly, they can be executed at the same time that
the're declared - this is what the `()` at the end of the anonymous function is
doing. Secondly they maintain access to the lexical scope they are defined in -
all the variables that are available at the point when you declare the anonymous
function are also available in the body of the function.

The body of the anonymous function above is just the same as the loop body was
before. The only difference is that each iteration of the loop will start a new
goroutine, concurrent with the current process (the `WebsiteChecker` function)
each of which will add its result to the results map.

But when we run `go test`:

```sh
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (0.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:31: Wanted map[http://google.com:true http://blog.gypsydave5.com:true waat://furhurterwe.geds:false], got map[]
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        0.010s

```

### A quick aside into a parallel(ism) universe...

You might not get this result. You might get a panic message that
we're going to talk about in a bit. Don't worry if you got that, just keep
running the test until you _do_ get the result above. Or pretend that you did.
Up to you. Welcome to concurrency: when it's not handled correctly it's hard to
predict what's going to happen. Don't worry - that's why we're writing tests, to
help us know when we're handling concurrency predictably.

### ... and we're back.

We are caught by the original tests `WebsiteChecker` is now returning an
empty map. What went wrong?

None of the goroutines that our `for` loop started had enough time to add
their result to the `results` map; the `WebsiteChecker` function is too fast for
them, and it returns the still empty map.

To fix this we can just wait while all the goroutines do their work, and then
return. Two seconds ought to do it, right?

```go
package concurrency

import "time"

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)

    for _, url := range urls {
        go func() {
            results[url] = wc(url)
        }()
    }

    time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

    return results
}
```

Now when we run the tests you get (or or don't get - see above):

```sh
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (0.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:31: Wanted map[http://google.com:true http://blog.gypsydave5.com:true waat://furhurterwe.geds:false], got map[waat://furhurterwe.geds:false]
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        0.010s
```

This isn't great - why only one result? We might try and fix this by increasing
the time we wait - try it if you like. It won't work. The problem here is that
the variable `url` is reused for each iteration of the `for` loop - it takes
a new value from `urls` each time. But each of our goroutines have a reference
to the `url` variable - they don't have their own independent copy. So they're
_all_ writing the value that `url` has at the end of the iteration - the last
url. Which is why the one result we have is the last url.

To fix this:

```go
package concurrency

import (
    "time"
)

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)

    for _, url := range urls {
        go func(u string) {
            results[u] = wc(u)
        }(url)
    }

    time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

    return results
}
```

By giving each anonymous function a parameter for the url - `u` - and then
calling the anonymous function with the `url` as the argument, we make sure that
the value of `u` is fixed as the value of `url` for the iteration of the loop
that we're launching the goroutine in. `u` is a copy of the value of `url`, and
so can't be changed.

Now if you're lucky you'll get:

```sh
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        2.012s
```

But if you're unlucky (this is more likely if you run them with the benchmark as you'll get more tries)

```sh
fatal error: concurrent map writes

goroutine 8 [running]:
runtime.throw(0x12c5895, 0x15)
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/panic.go:605 +0x95 fp=0xc420037700 sp=0xc4200376e0 pc=0x102d395
runtime.mapassign_faststr(0x1271d80, 0xc42007acf0, 0x12c6634, 0x17, 0x0)
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:783 +0x4f5 fp=0xc420037780 sp=0xc420037700 pc=0x100eb65
github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1(0xc42007acf0, 0x12d3938, 0x12c6634, 0x17)
        /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x71 fp=0xc4200377c0 sp=0xc420037780 pc=0x12308f1
runtime.goexit()
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/asm_amd64.s:2337 +0x1 fp=0xc4200377c8 sp=0xc4200377c0 pc=0x105cf01
created by github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker
        /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xa1

        ... many more scary lines of text ...
```

This is long and scary, but all we need to do is take a breath and read the
stacktrace: `fatal error: concurrent map writes`. Sometimes, when we run our
tests, two of the goroutines write to the results map at exactly the same time.
Maps in Go don't like it when more than one thing tries to write to them at
once, and so `fatal error`.

This is a _race condition_, a bug that occurs when the output of our software is
dependent on the timing and sequence of events that we have no control over.
Because we cannot control exactly when each goroutine writes to the results map,
we are vulnerable to two goroutines writing to it at the same time.

Go can help us to spot race conditions with its built in [_race detector_][godoc_race_detector].
To enable this feature, run the tests with the `race` flag: `go test -race`.

You should get some output that looks like this:

```sh
==================
WARNING: DATA RACE
Write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 8:
  runtime.mapassign_faststr()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:774 +0x0
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x82

Previous write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 7:
  runtime.mapassign_faststr()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:774 +0x0
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x82

Goroutine 8 (running) created at:
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xc4
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.TestWebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker_test.go:27 +0xad
  testing.tRunner()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/testing/testing.go:746 +0x16c

Goroutine 7 (finished) created at:
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xc4
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.TestWebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker_test.go:27 +0xad
  testing.tRunner()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/testing/testing.go:746 +0x16c
==================
```

The details are, again, hard to read - but `WARNING: DATA RACE` is pretty
unambiguous. Reading into the body of the error we can see two different
goroutines performing writes on a map:

`Write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 8:`

is writing to the same block of memory as

`Previous write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 7:`

On top of that we can see the line of code where the write is happening:

`/Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12`

and the line of code where goroutines 7 an 8 are started:

`/Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11`

Everything you need to know is printed to your terminal - all you have to do is
be patient enough to read it.

### Channels

We can solve this data race by coordinating our goroutines using _channels_.
Channels are a Go data structure that can both receive and send values. These
operations, along with their details, allow communication between different
processes.

In this case we want to think about the communication between the parent process
and each of the goroutines that it makes to do the work of running the
`WebsiteChecker` function with the url.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool
type result struct {
    string
    bool
}

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
    results := make(map[string]bool)
    resultChannel := make(chan result)

    for _, url := range urls {
        go func(u string) {
            resultChannel <- result{u, wc(u)}
        }(url)
    }

    for i := 0; i < len(urls); i++ {
        result := <-resultChannel
        results[result.string] = result.bool
    }

    return results
}
```

Alongside the `results` map we now have a `resultChannel`, which we `make` in
the same way. `chan result` is the type of the channel - a channel of `result`.
The new type, `result` has been made to associate the return value of the
`WebsiteChecker` with the url being checked - it's a struct of `string` and
`bool`. As we don't need either value to be named, each of them is anonymous
within the struct; this can be useful in when it's hard to know what to name
a value.

Now when we iterate over the urls, instead of writing to the `map` directly
we're sending a `result` struct for each call to `wc` to the `resultChannel`
with a _send statement_. This uses the `<-` operator, taking a channel on the
left and a value on the right:

```go
// Send statement
resultChannel <- result{u, wc(u)}
```

The next `for` loop iterates once for each of the urls. Inside we're using
a _receive expression_, which assigns a value received from a channel to
a variable. This also uses the `<-` operator, but with the two operands now
reversed: the channel is now on the right and the variable that
we're assigning to is on the left:

```go
// Receive expression
result := <-resultChannel
```

We then use the `result` received to update the map.

By sending the results into a channel, we can control the timing of each write
into the results map, ensuring that it happens one at a time. Although each of
the calls of `wc`, and each send to the result channel, is happening in parallel
inside its own process, each of the results is being dealt with one at a time as
we take values out of the result channel with the receive expression.

We have paralellized the part of the code that we wanted to make faster, while
making sure that the part that cannot happen in parallel still happens linearly.
And we have communicated across the multiple processes involved by using
channels.

When we run the benchmark:

```sh
pkg: github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v2
BenchmarkCheckWebsites-8             100          23406615 ns/op
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v2        2.377s
```
23406615 nanoseconds - 0.023 seconds, about one hundred times as fast as
original function. A great success.

## Wrapping up

This exercise has been a little lighter on the TDD than usual. In a way we've
been taking part in one long refactoring of the `CheckWebsites` function; the
inputs and outputs never changed, it just got faster. But the tests we had in
place, as well as the benchmark we wrote, allowed us to refactor `CheckWebsites`
in a way that maintained confidence that the software was still working, while
demonstrating that it had actually become faster.

In making it faster we learned about

- *goroutines*, the basic unit of concurrency in Go, which let us check more
  than one website at the same time.
- *anonymous functions*, which we used to start each of the concurrent processes
  that check websites.
- *channels*, to help organize and control the communication between the
  different processes, allowing us to avoid a *race condition* bug.
- *the race detector* which helped us debug problems with concurrent code

### Make it fast

One formulation of an agile way of building software, often misattributed to Kent
Beck, is:

> [Make it work, make it right, make it fast][wrf]

Where 'work' is making the tests pass, 'right' is refactoring the code, and
'fast' is optimizing the code to make it, for example, run quickly. We can only
'make it fast' once we've made it work and made it right. We were lucky that the
code we were given was already demonstrated to be working, and didn't need to be
refactored. We should never try to 'make it fast' before the other two steps
have been performed because

> [Premature optimization is the root of all evil][popt]
> -- Donald Knuth

[DI]: ../dependency-injection.md#
[wrf]: http://wiki.c2.com/?MakeItWorkMakeItRightMakeItFast
[godoc_race_detector]: https://blog.golang.org/race-detector
[popt]: http://wiki.c2.com/?PrematureOptimization
