concurrency/readme.md, before:

## WIP

# Concurrency

Here's the setup: a colleague has written a function, `CheckWebsites`, that
checks the status of a list of URLs.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		results[url] = wc(url)
	}

	return results
}
```

It returns a map of the URL checked to a boolean - `true` for a good response,
`false` for a bad response. They've also been sensible enough to inject the
function that tests each individual website, and they've given it a sensible
alias: `WebsiteChecker`.

Here's the tests they've written:
```go
package concurrency

import (
	"reflect"
	"testing"
)

func mockWebsiteChecker(url string) bool {
	if url == "waat://furhurterwe.geds" {
		return false
	}
	return true
}

func TestCheckWebsites(t *testing.T) {
	websites := []string{
		"http://google.com",
		"http://blog.gypsydave5.com",
		"waat://furhurterwe.geds",
	}

	actualResults := CheckWebsites(mockWebsiteChecker, websites)

	want := len(websites)
	got := len(actualResults)
	if want != got {
		t.Fatalf("Wanted %v, got %v", want, got)
	}

	expectedResults := map[string]bool{
		"http://google.com":          true,
		"http://blog.gypsydave5.com": true,
		"waat://furhurterwe.geds":    false,
	}

	if !reflect.DeepEqual(expectedResults, actualResults) {
		t.Fatalf("Wanted %v, got %v", expectedResults, actualResults)
	}
}
```

The function is in production and being used to check hundreds of websites. But
your colleague has started to get complaints that it's slow, so they've asked
you to help speed it up.

### Write a test

Let's use a benchmark to test the speed of `CheckWebsites`:

```go
package concurrency

import (
	"testing"
	"time"
)

func slowStubWebsiteChecker(_ string) bool {
	time.Sleep(20 * time.Millisecond)
	return true
}

func BenchmarkCheckWebsites(b *testing.B) {
	urls := make([]string, 100)
	for i := 0; i < len(urls); i++ {
		urls[i] = "a url"
	}

	for i := 0; i < b.N; i++ {
		CheckWebsites(slowStubWebsiteChecker, urls)
	}
}
```

The benchmark tests `CheckWebsites` using a slice of one hundred urls and uses
a new fake implementation of `WebsiteChecker`. `slowStubWebsiteChecker` is
deliberately slow. It uses `time.Sleep` to wait exactly twenty milliseconds and
then it returns true.

When we run the benchmark using `go test -bench=.`:

```sh
pkg: github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v0
BenchmarkCheckWebsites-4               1        2249228637 ns/op
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v0        2.268s
```

`CheckWebsites` has been benchmarked at 2249228637 nanoseconds - about two and
a quarter seconds.

Let's try and make this faster.

### Write enough code to make it pass

Concurrency in Go is built up from _goroutines_. In any place where you can call
a function, you can place the keyword `go` in front of it and the function will
execute as a separate process to the parent process.

With a normal function in Go

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func() {
			results[url] = wc(url)
		}()
	}

	return results
}
```

Concurrency in Go is built up from _goroutines_. In any place where you can call
a function, you can place the keyword `go` in front of it and the function will
execute as a separate process to the parent process.

Here we are executing an anonymous function as a goroutine inside the `for` loop
we had before. In Go, anonymous function literals look exactly the same as
normal functions, only they don't have names (because they're anonymous).

The body of the function is just the same as the loop body was before. The only
difference is that each iteration of the loop will start a new process, in
parallel to with the current process (the `WebsiteChecker` function) each of
which will add its result to the results map.

But when we run `go test`:

```sh
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (0.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:27: Wanted 3, got 0
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        0.014s
```

A quick aside into a parallel universe...

You might not get this result. You might get an enormous panic message that
we're going to talk about in a bit. Don't worry if you got that, just keep
running the test until you _do_ get the result above. Or pretend that you did.
Up to you. Welcome to concurrency: when it's not handled correctly it's hard to
predict what's going to happen. Don't worry - that's why we're writing tests, to
help us know when we're handling concurrency predictably.

... and we're back.

We are caught by the original tests `WebsiteChecker` is now returning an
empty map. What went wrong?

None of the goroutines that our `for` loop started had enough time to add
their result to the `results` map; the `WebsiteChecker` function is too fast for
them, and it returns the still empty map.

To fix this we can just wait while all the goroutines do their work, and then
return. Two seconds ought to do it, right?

```go
package concurrency

import "time"

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func() {
			results[url] = wc(url)
		}()
	}

	time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

	return results
}
```

Now when we run the tests you get:[^1]

```sh
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (2.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:27: Wanted 3, got 1
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        2.024s
```

This isn't great - why only one result? We might try and fix this by increasing
the time we wait - try it if you like. It won't work. The problem here is that
the variable `url` is reused for each iteration of the `for ...` loop - it takes
a new value from `urls` each time. But each of our anonymous function goroutines
have a reference to the `url` variable - they don't have their own independent
copy. So they're _all_ (probably) writing the final value that `url` reaches.

We can see this if we sneak in a quick `fmt.Println` into the function body.

```go
package concurrency

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func() {
			results[url] = wc(url)
		}()
	}

	time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

	fmt.Println(results)

	return results
}
```

```sh
map[waat://furhurterwe.geds:false]
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (2.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:27: Wanted 3, got 1
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        2.030s
```

There it is - just at the top! Each of the three goroutines in the test wrote
exactly the same value into the map, and as the map's keys have to be unique
each write overwrote the last.

To fix this:

```go
package concurrency

import (
	"time"
)

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func(u string) {
			results[u] = wc(u)
		}(url)
	}

	time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

	return results
}
```

By giving each anonymous function a parameter for the url - `u` - and then
calling the anonymous function with the `url` as the argument, we make sure that
the value of `u` is fixed as the value of `url` for the iteration of the loop
that we're launching the goroutine in. `u` is a copy of the value of `url`, and
so can't be changed. This is a huge gotcha when running anonymous functions as
goroutines, so watch out for it.

Now if you're lucky you'll get:

```sh
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        2.012s
```

But if you're unlucky (this is more likely if you run them with `go test -bench=.`)

```sh
fatal error: concurrent map writes

goroutine 8 [running]:
runtime.throw(0x12c5895, 0x15)
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/panic.go:605 +0x95 fp=0xc420037700 sp=0xc4200376e0 pc=0x102d395
runtime.mapassign_faststr(0x1271d80, 0xc42007acf0, 0x12c6634, 0x17, 0x0)
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:783 +0x4f5 fp=0xc420037780 sp=0xc420037700 pc=0x100eb65
github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1(0xc42007acf0, 0x12d3938, 0x12c6634, 0x17)
        /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x71 fp=0xc4200377c0 sp=0xc420037780 pc=0x12308f1
runtime.goexit()
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/asm_amd64.s:2337 +0x1 fp=0xc4200377c8 sp=0xc4200377c0 pc=0x105cf01
created by github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker
        /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xa1

        ... many more scary lines of text ...
```

Errors this long tend to freak me out, but all we need to do is pay attention to
the headline: `fatal error: concurrent map writes`. Sometimes, when we run our
tests, two of the goroutines write to the results map at exactly the same time,
and maps in Go don't like it when more than one thing tries to write to them at
once.

This is a _race condition_, a bug that occurs when the output of our software is
dependent on the timing and sequence of events that we have no control over.
Because we cannot control exactly when each goroutine writes to the results, we
are vulnerable to two goroutines writing to it at the same time.

Go can help us to spot race conditions with its built in [_race detetector_][godoc_race_detector].
To enable this feature, run the tests with the `race` flag: `go test -race`.

You should get some pretty verbose output that looks a bit like this:

```sh
==================
WARNING: DATA RACE
Write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 8:
  runtime.mapassign_faststr()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:774 +0x0
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x82

Previous write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 7:
  runtime.mapassign_faststr()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:774 +0x0
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x82

Goroutine 8 (running) created at:
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xc4
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.TestWebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker_test.go:27 +0xad
  testing.tRunner()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/testing/testing.go:746 +0x16c

Goroutine 7 (finished) created at:
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xc4
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.TestWebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker_test.go:27 +0xad
  testing.tRunner()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/testing/testing.go:746 +0x16c
==================
```

The details are, again, hard to read - but not the headline isn't: `WARNING: DATA
RACE` is pretty unambiguous. Reading into the body of the error we can see two
different goroutines performing writes on a map:

`Write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 8:`

is writing to the same block of memory as

`Previous write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 7:`

On top of that we can see the line of code where the write is happening:

`/Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12`

and the line of code where goroutines 7 an 8 are started:

`/Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11`

Everything is in the stack trace - all you have to do is be patient enough to
read it.

### Channels

We can solve this problem by coordinating our goroutines using _channels_.
Channels are a Go data structure that can both receive and send values. These
operations, along with their details, allow communication between different
processes.

In this case we want to think about the communication between the parent process
and each of the goroutines that it makes to do the work of running the
`WebsiteChecker` function with the url.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool
type result struct {
	string
	bool
}

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)
	resultChannel := make(chan result)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func(u string) {
			resultChannel <- result{u, wc(u)}
		}(url)
	}

	for i := 0; i < len(urls); i++ {
		result := <-resultChannel
		results[result.string] = result.bool
	}

	return results
}
```

Alongside the `results` map we now have a `resultChannel`, which we `make` in
the same way. `chan result` is the type of the channel - a channel of `result`.
The new type, `result` has been made to associate the return value of the
`WebsiteChecker` with the url being checked - it's a struct of `string` and
`bool`. As we don't need either value to be named, each of them is anonymous
within the struct; this can be useful in when it's hard to know what to name
a value.

Now when we iterate over the urls, instead of writing to the `map` directly
we're sending a `result` struct for each call to `wc` to the `resultChannel`
with a _send statement_. This uses the `<-` operator and has the channel on the
left, a `<-` and the value on the right:

```
// Send statement
resultChannel <- result{u, wc(u)}
```

The next `for` loop iterates once for each of the urls. Inside we're using
a _receive expression_, which assigns a value received from a channel to
a variable. This also uses the `<-` operator, but with the two operands now
reversed: the channel is now on the right and the variable that
we're assigning to is on the left:

```
// Receive expression
result := <-resultChannel
```

We then use the `result` received to update the results map.

By sending the results into a channel, we can control the timing of each write
into the results map. Although each of the calls of `wc` is now happening in
parallel inside its own process.

```sh
pkg: github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v2
BenchmarkCheckWebsites-8             100          23406615 ns/op
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v2        2.377s
```

[^1]: Or the huge error message. Again with the concurrency headaches.

[Arrays]: ../arrays/
[For]: ../for/
[godoc_maps]: https://blog.golang.org/go-maps-in-action
[godoc_zero_values]: https://golang.org/ref/spec#The_zero_value
[godoc_race_detector]: https://blog.golang.org/race-detector

## An observation

Did you notice that the time it took for the `websiteCheckerTest` to run
increased dramatically when we were really checking websites? It added around
a quarter of a second to the total time. Although the Internet is fast, and the
response we're getting from the websites is coming back pretty quickly, it still
takes time for our functions to make those real requests.

Commit message:

Think it is about done

concurrency/readme.md, after:

## WIP

# Concurrency

Here's the setup: a colleague has written a function, `CheckWebsites`, that
checks the status of a list of URLs.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		results[url] = wc(url)
	}

	return results
}
```

It returns a map of the URL checked to a boolean - `true` for a good response,
`false` for a bad response. They've also been sensible enough to inject the
function that tests each individual website, and they've given it a sensible
alias: `WebsiteChecker`.

Here's the tests they've written:
```go
package concurrency

import (
	"reflect"
	"testing"
)

func mockWebsiteChecker(url string) bool {
	if url == "waat://furhurterwe.geds" {
		return false
	}
	return true
}

func TestCheckWebsites(t *testing.T) {
	websites := []string{
		"http://google.com",
		"http://blog.gypsydave5.com",
		"waat://furhurterwe.geds",
	}

	actualResults := CheckWebsites(mockWebsiteChecker, websites)

	want := len(websites)
	got := len(actualResults)
	if want != got {
		t.Fatalf("Wanted %v, got %v", want, got)
	}

	expectedResults := map[string]bool{
		"http://google.com":          true,
		"http://blog.gypsydave5.com": true,
		"waat://furhurterwe.geds":    false,
	}

	if !reflect.DeepEqual(expectedResults, actualResults) {
		t.Fatalf("Wanted %v, got %v", expectedResults, actualResults)
	}
}
```

The function is in production and being used to check hundreds of websites. But
your colleague has started to get complaints that it's slow, so they've asked
you to help speed it up.

### Write a test

Let's use a benchmark to test the speed of `CheckWebsites`:

```go
package concurrency

import (
	"testing"
	"time"
)

func slowStubWebsiteChecker(_ string) bool {
	time.Sleep(20 * time.Millisecond)
	return true
}

func BenchmarkCheckWebsites(b *testing.B) {
	urls := make([]string, 100)
	for i := 0; i < len(urls); i++ {
		urls[i] = "a url"
	}

	for i := 0; i < b.N; i++ {
		CheckWebsites(slowStubWebsiteChecker, urls)
	}
}
```

The benchmark tests `CheckWebsites` using a slice of one hundred urls and uses
a new fake implementation of `WebsiteChecker`. `slowStubWebsiteChecker` is
deliberately slow. It uses `time.Sleep` to wait exactly twenty milliseconds and
then it returns true.

When we run the benchmark using `go test -bench=.`:

```sh
pkg: github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v0
BenchmarkCheckWebsites-4               1        2249228637 ns/op
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v0        2.268s
```

`CheckWebsites` has been benchmarked at 2249228637 nanoseconds - about two and
a quarter seconds.

Let's try and make this faster.

### Write enough code to make it pass

Concurrency in Go is built up from _goroutines_. In any place where you can call
a function, you can place the keyword `go` in front of it and the function will
execute as a separate process to the parent process.

With a normal function in Go

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func() {
			results[url] = wc(url)
		}()
	}

	return results
}
```

Concurrency in Go is built up from _goroutines_. In any place where you can call
a function, you can place the keyword `go` in front of it and the function will
execute as a separate process to the parent process.

Here we are executing an anonymous function as a goroutine inside the `for` loop
we had before. In Go, anonymous function literals look exactly the same as
normal functions, only they don't have names (because they're anonymous).

The body of the function is just the same as the loop body was before. The only
difference is that each iteration of the loop will start a new process, in
parallel to with the current process (the `WebsiteChecker` function) each of
which will add its result to the results map.

But when we run `go test`:

```sh
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (0.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:27: Wanted 3, got 0
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        0.014s
```

A quick aside into a parallel universe...

You might not get this result. You might get an enormous panic message that
we're going to talk about in a bit. Don't worry if you got that, just keep
running the test until you _do_ get the result above. Or pretend that you did.
Up to you. Welcome to concurrency: when it's not handled correctly it's hard to
predict what's going to happen. Don't worry - that's why we're writing tests, to
help us know when we're handling concurrency predictably.

... and we're back.

We are caught by the original tests `WebsiteChecker` is now returning an
empty map. What went wrong?

None of the goroutines that our `for` loop started had enough time to add
their result to the `results` map; the `WebsiteChecker` function is too fast for
them, and it returns the still empty map.

To fix this we can just wait while all the goroutines do their work, and then
return. Two seconds ought to do it, right?

```go
package concurrency

import "time"

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func() {
			results[url] = wc(url)
		}()
	}

	time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

	return results
}
```

Now when we run the tests you get:[^1]

```sh
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (2.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:27: Wanted 3, got 1
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        2.024s
```

This isn't great - why only one result? We might try and fix this by increasing
the time we wait - try it if you like. It won't work. The problem here is that
the variable `url` is reused for each iteration of the `for ...` loop - it takes
a new value from `urls` each time. But each of our anonymous function goroutines
have a reference to the `url` variable - they don't have their own independent
copy. So they're _all_ (probably) writing the final value that `url` reaches.

We can see this if we sneak in a quick `fmt.Println` into the function body.

```go
package concurrency

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func() {
			results[url] = wc(url)
		}()
	}

	time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

	fmt.Println(results)

	return results
}
```

```sh
map[waat://furhurterwe.geds:false]
--- FAIL: TestCheckWebsites (2.00s)
        CheckWebsites_test.go:27: Wanted 3, got 1
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        2.030s
```

There it is - just at the top! Each of the three goroutines in the test wrote
exactly the same value into the map, and as the map's keys have to be unique
each write overwrote the last.

To fix this:

```go
package concurrency

import (
	"time"
)

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func(u string) {
			results[u] = wc(u)
		}(url)
	}

	time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

	return results
}
```

By giving each anonymous function a parameter for the url - `u` - and then
calling the anonymous function with the `url` as the argument, we make sure that
the value of `u` is fixed as the value of `url` for the iteration of the loop
that we're launching the goroutine in. `u` is a copy of the value of `url`, and
so can't be changed. This is a huge gotcha when running anonymous functions as
goroutines, so watch out for it.

Now if you're lucky you'll get:

```sh
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v1        2.012s
```

But if you're unlucky (this is more likely if you run them with `go test -bench=.`)

```sh
fatal error: concurrent map writes

goroutine 8 [running]:
runtime.throw(0x12c5895, 0x15)
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/panic.go:605 +0x95 fp=0xc420037700 sp=0xc4200376e0 pc=0x102d395
runtime.mapassign_faststr(0x1271d80, 0xc42007acf0, 0x12c6634, 0x17, 0x0)
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:783 +0x4f5 fp=0xc420037780 sp=0xc420037700 pc=0x100eb65
github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1(0xc42007acf0, 0x12d3938, 0x12c6634, 0x17)
        /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x71 fp=0xc4200377c0 sp=0xc420037780 pc=0x12308f1
runtime.goexit()
        /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/asm_amd64.s:2337 +0x1 fp=0xc4200377c8 sp=0xc4200377c0 pc=0x105cf01
created by github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker
        /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xa1

        ... many more scary lines of text ...
```

Errors this long tend to freak me out, but all we need to do is pay attention to
the headline: `fatal error: concurrent map writes`. Sometimes, when we run our
tests, two of the goroutines write to the results map at exactly the same time,
and maps in Go don't like it when more than one thing tries to write to them at
once.

This is a _race condition_, a bug that occurs when the output of our software is
dependent on the timing and sequence of events that we have no control over.
Because we cannot control exactly when each goroutine writes to the results, we
are vulnerable to two goroutines writing to it at the same time.

Go can help us to spot race conditions with its built in [_race detetector_][godoc_race_detector].
To enable this feature, run the tests with the `race` flag: `go test -race`.

You should get some pretty verbose output that looks a bit like this:

```sh
==================
WARNING: DATA RACE
Write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 8:
  runtime.mapassign_faststr()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:774 +0x0
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x82

Previous write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 7:
  runtime.mapassign_faststr()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/runtime/hashmap_fast.go:774 +0x0
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker.func1()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12 +0x82

Goroutine 8 (running) created at:
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xc4
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.TestWebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker_test.go:27 +0xad
  testing.tRunner()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/testing/testing.go:746 +0x16c

Goroutine 7 (finished) created at:
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.WebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11 +0xc4
  github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3.TestWebsiteChecker()
      /Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker_test.go:27 +0xad
  testing.tRunner()
      /usr/local/Cellar/go/1.9.3/libexec/src/testing/testing.go:746 +0x16c
==================
```

The details are, again, hard to read - but not the headline isn't: `WARNING: DATA
RACE` is pretty unambiguous. Reading into the body of the error we can see two
different goroutines performing writes on a map:

`Write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 8:`

is writing to the same block of memory as

`Previous write at 0x00c420084d20 by goroutine 7:`

On top of that we can see the line of code where the write is happening:

`/Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:12`

and the line of code where goroutines 7 an 8 are started:

`/Users/gypsydave5/go/src/github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v3/websiteChecker.go:11`

Everything is in the stack trace - all you have to do is be patient enough to
read it.

### Channels

We can solve this problem by coordinating our goroutines using _channels_.
Channels are a Go data structure that can both receive and send values. These
operations, along with their details, allow communication between different
processes.

In this case we want to think about the communication between the parent process
and each of the goroutines that it makes to do the work of running the
`WebsiteChecker` function with the url.

```go
package concurrency

type WebsiteChecker func(string) bool
type result struct {
	string
	bool
}

func CheckWebsites(wc WebsiteChecker, urls []string) map[string]bool {
	results := make(map[string]bool)
	resultChannel := make(chan result)

	for _, url := range urls {
		go func(u string) {
			resultChannel <- result{u, wc(u)}
		}(url)
	}

	for i := 0; i < len(urls); i++ {
		result := <-resultChannel
		results[result.string] = result.bool
	}

	return results
}
```

Alongside the `results` map we now have a `resultChannel`, which we `make` in
the same way. `chan result` is the type of the channel - a channel of `result`.
The new type, `result` has been made to associate the return value of the
`WebsiteChecker` with the url being checked - it's a struct of `string` and
`bool`. As we don't need either value to be named, each of them is anonymous
within the struct; this can be useful in when it's hard to know what to name
a value.

Now when we iterate over the urls, instead of writing to the `map` directly
we're sending a `result` struct for each call to `wc` to the `resultChannel`
with a _send statement_. This uses the `<-` operator and has the channel on the
left, a `<-` and the value on the right:

```
// Send statement
resultChannel <- result{u, wc(u)}
```

The next `for` loop iterates once for each of the urls. Inside we're using
a _receive expression_, which assigns a value received from a channel to
a variable. This also uses the `<-` operator, but with the two operands now
reversed: the channel is now on the right and the variable that
we're assigning to is on the left:

```
// Receive expression
result := <-resultChannel
```

We then use the `result` received to update the map.

By sending the results into a channel, we can control the timing of each write
into the results map, ensuring that it happens one at a time. Although each of
the calls of `wc`, and each send to the result channel, is happening in parallel
inside its own process, each of the results is being dealt with one at a time as
we take values out of the result channel with the receive expression.

We have paralellized the part of the code that we wanted to make faster, while
making sure that the part that cannot happen in parallel still happens linearly.
And we have communicated across the multiple processes involved by using
channels.

When we run the benchmark:

```sh
pkg: github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v2
BenchmarkCheckWebsites-8             100          23406615 ns/op
PASS
ok      github.com/gypsydave5/learn-go-with-tests/concurrency/v2        2.377s
```
23406615 nanoseconds - 0.023 seconds, about one hundred times as fast as
original function. A great success.

[^1]: Or the huge error message. Again with the concurrency headaches.

[Arrays]: ../arrays/
[For]: ../for/
[godoc_maps]: https://blog.golang.org/go-maps-in-action
[godoc_zero_values]: https://golang.org/ref/spec#The_zero_value
[godoc_race_detector]: https://blog.golang.org/race-detector
